Firstly, I just want to say thank you again to everyone for being here.
My name's Michael Brady.
If you've been at Perspective Event at any time in the last year, you may have seen me
before.
I'm delighted to be joined by my good friend, long-time friend, Fat Lin, who's a senior
Dharma teacher in the Plum Village Zen tradition, which is the tradition of Teek-Nut-Han.
What can I say about Fat Lin?
I first met Fat Lin I think it was 2010 when I went to Plum Village for a treat for the
first time and I can share I've been reading a lot of Teek-Nut-Han's books and really falling
in love with this path of practice and I was very excited to go to Plum Village and when
I got to Plum Village saw Teek-Nut-Han and that was wonderful but one of the things that
surprised me that really struck me was the kind of way of being of the monastics there
and they seemed very happy and very relaxed and I thought I want to have some of that.
Something that really embodied that for me was Fat Lin and so he's been a good friend
to me for many, many years and he's a wonderful Dharma teacher at Plum Village and gives wonderful
talks on Buddhism but also integrates a lot of wisdom and fields of knowledge that are
also outside of Buddhism so philosophy and science and many of you here are fans of Ian
McGillchrist and Fat Lin is also a fan of Ian McGillchrist and there's been a conversation
with him I think he came to Plum Village or beamed in for a neuroscience retreat during
COVID when it was online retreats but Fat Lin is also a wonderful composer and cellist and was
a composer before he became a monk so I'm really excited to talk with Fat Lin and yeah engage in
this dialogue so welcome Fat Lin to this space. Well thank you thank you Michael for such a
generous introduction. Yeah with everyone. So I thought what would be nice to start I want to
get into a conversation and if you haven't been at one of these events usually what we do is we
have a conversation for about an hour and then we'll open up to Q&A. What I'd like to do today
is actually start a little bit differently and I'm very grateful that Fat Lin's given me permission
for this before we started so what I'd like to do is we're going to start with a little short
practice that Fat Lin will guide us in just a few minutes three or four minutes and just to bring
us into a kind of a quality of awareness and attention and then I'm going to play a piece of
music that Fat Lin... I think did you write this or was this a translation of a Plum Village
chant? I think the piece with you on piano and channel. Yeah I wrote it. Okay nice nice nice.
Yeah so thank you everyone for being here and yeah this is a piece of music which is
an instrumental version of a chant which is actually in French so it's based on a text which
was originally in Classical Chinese which my teacher translated into vernacular Vietnamese
and then was then translated into English and then into French and every time it was translated
my teacher Thay just means teacher in Vietnamese that's Tiggian Han. He wanted it to be set to
music and the thing he told me he always said this in relation to music and in any kind of cultural
expression he said use local materials which I took to mean you know find a musical language and
style which is you know rooted here somehow whatever that means so I didn't really know what
that meant but I kind of went... I suppose I went digging in a feeling of Celtic roots because I'm
kind of Welsh, French, English, some mishmash of all of the above and yeah there's just a feeling
of rootedness in with yeah a familiarity with those roots somehow a feeling of home so I felt
like maybe that style or that kind of musical language would connect and so we have a chant
for it in French and this was the melody that I composed and then during the right at the beginning
of the pandemic I actually was in lockdown and sort of out of loose sense I just thought well
why don't I transcribe it you know make an instrumental version I wrote a piano accompaniment
and then I recorded myself playing the piano part and then added the cello part on top just
because it was just a way for me to connect with people in the world and just to offer to feel like
I could offer something maybe a little moment of solace for people who were going through really
tough times as I think many many were at the time so yeah let's just just take a moment to
kind of see if we can cultivate a deeper kind of presence a deeper kind of listening
we know that the presence is something which is of a variable nature we can be more or less
present and and there are ways that we can establish our presence so for me one of the
ways that I like to employ that I learned from my teacher is to bring my awareness to my body
to my sensations in the body so we can start just noticing whatever position our feet happen to be in
however those sensations are we don't have to sit in any special way but just noticing the feet
feel like that the legs feel like that the buttocks feel like that the back
the shoulders the arms the hands the head face eyes and forehead and ears and nose and cheeks and
mouth and tongue and just bringing all of these sensations which are always there
but just bringing them back into the sphere of our awareness and what that does is that that then
grounds us and connects us to the present moment because all of those sensations are only ever in
the present and so as long as we are with those sensations the feeling of weight
maybe is tiny little micro movements and changing of the balance and the curvature of our spine as we
breathe you can even feel the air on our skin even if it's barely moving even if we're indoors
you can feel the tiny tiny little movements and currents of air because our skin is so sensitive
and these are all the sensations that we might otherwise just overlook or disregard
because they're slight but when we bring our attention to them they can grow
and we may realize oh even if there's a little bit of tension there might be a little bit of pain
somewhere in the body but overall perhaps it's it can be quite pleasant
just to be in those sensations now we can just notice the breath coming in
the movement of the in breath the movement of the out breath and we're just coming deeper and deeper
as though we could sort of sink ourselves into ourselves sink ourselves deeper into our own
sensations into our own weight and just sit ourselves deeper and deeper
arriving more and more in this moment in these sensations
and yeah I suggest as we turn on the music maybe just allow yourself to stay to just keep
the little thread of awareness of the breath coming in and coming out
you
You
Thank you for that. Thank you for that, brother
Do I need a little bit of time?
Oh, you're muted. Can you hear now? Can you speak?
Ah, there we go. Go.
Yeah, I feel I need a little time to launch into a conversation after after that
It's really beautiful. It's quite it's quite something to listen together in presence
And I think it's yeah, it's it's weirdly rare, you know that we that we allow ourselves to do that
We see that in plum village that you will you know plum village is a monastery where I live in the south of France and
We have big summer retreats that maybe like a thousand people show up for four weeks in the summer and a lot of children maybe like 150 kids running around
And one of the practices that we have is walking meditation everyone walks in silence and presence quite slowly just aware of every step so they're basically doing what we were just doing
Sitting being aware of our feet being aware of our body, but you're doing it in motion. So you're just
Bringing your attention back again and again to the present to the sensation of your feet touching the ground and so on the legs moving the whole body moving
The environment around you the other people yourself your feelings your thoughts everything in the present to cultivating that precious
But sort of under appreciated resource of presence you could call it mindfulness
And then so tie our teacher loved he sort of this was one of his favorite inventions and I just I wasn't planning to talk about it
But it just seems to fit so perfectly with the topic of this conversation he once a week we would walk down the hill from Upper Hamlet to another part of the monastery with a little courtyard and
If we could if we were lucky enough there would be some musicians that there's a I'm a chalice that we have a sister wonderful violinist and then sometimes there were some other professional musicians who would come so sometimes we could pull together a string quartet
And we would be there under the trees waiting for a thousand people to appear walking very slowly and silently who would then surround us at this fast silent ocean it's quite something a thousand people in silence and sitting down
And we would start playing Mozart and Bach and and Schubert and you know and people would have this transcendent experience so there's listening to music they were very familiar with but they'd never really, really listen to before in that way because
The you know the field of presence is a collective phenomenon as well so when you have a thousand people all generating that awareness and presence, suddenly the music lives and breathes in a completely different way and people will be crying and so
Yeah, I feel like that's one of the great joys of my life that I get to to offer music in that kind of setting when people are very deeply present.
Yeah, and as you say this is something that seems to be more and more rare in the modern world.
I think, I think the kind of initial impetus for this series of conversations was the the the short hand we were throwing around the perspective of music in the metacrisis, right, you know, which is, you know, music and the state of the world, you know, and I think one thing that seems, I mean the metacrisis has so many aspects to it.
It's like I think of it as somewhat like an entangled kind of karmic knot that we seem to not be able to really disentangle ourselves from you know this complex system that kind of hardens and not gets tighter each time.
But if there's one thread in that it would seem that it's it's habits of attention in the way that we dispose our attention and the way culture and society and technology increasingly and the economy pulls us into words habits of attention that are the exact opposite of what you describe.
You know, so yeah, we've jumped we've jumped right into the heart of this.
Yeah, yeah, it's beautiful.
And part of part of this part of this this inquiry is is how can we how can we make those kind of qualities of of togetherness.
And we communicate as could be a word.
Those kind of experiences come more alive because they seem to be the lifeblood of the soul and something that's deeply necessary for us, you know, absolutely.
Yeah.
Yeah, I think about concerts.
We used to go to concerts.
I was at a music school in Edinburgh.
When I was a man from age 11 and they had this wonderful idea which is to to offer a season tickets to the.
I guess it was the music or the Scottish National Orchestra, probably, I think something like that and they would play in the big hall there.
It's called it's called Waverly Hall or some kind of hall and so every Saturday night or Thursday night or whatever night we would go there and you know there'd be some grand production, big, you know, orchestral symphonic concert and our, you know, aged 13.
Yeah, usher hall there you go RS and yeah, thank you.
Somebody's on the ball.
And so aged sort of 1415 we thought it was very clever to stand on the tickets to stand on the steps and sell our tickets and go and do something else, being very diligent music students that we were.
But it's because actually the whole experience often was so stultifying.
And you get a lot of very well dressed people who are probably sleeping, like I'd say, at least 50% asleep.
The other 50% said I mean they didn't have mobile phones at least they weren't looking at screens but they were kind of really discreetly trying to read the program or, and also just maybe daydreaming like and it's not.
This is not a judgment, like, it's actually quite hard to pay attention.
You have to learn how to do so you have to and I found it myself I'd be there.
And then my mind would wonder and I'd be like I'm not even listening to this.
So, and then you start thinking about the players and then as an as a classical musician, you know that sometimes you can play.
And your mind is also wondering, you know, you might not even be there.
So, if nobody, you know, nobody's there, thank the players on the audience isn't there.
So what's happening.
The question for me is how to be there.
Everyone from the players, even the composer to the to the to the sort of setup of the space the listening the presence.
And then I think that's that's when the magic happens when you're there.
And sometimes it just happens by accident sort of by a kind of by a kind of grace.
Even with an orchestra, you know, I would go to concerts in London and just every so often you get a conductor who isn't using authority, but is using love.
And you feel it like the whole orchestra is just like, we love you, you're amazing.
Like, and so they will do anything for that conductor.
And, and then it's electric.
Everybody's there.
Everybody's fully present.
When you say that your doctor is using love, but then are you are you talking about is that how is that expressing itself?
Like, is that is that a love and a care for the musicians?
Is that a love for the music?
Are they kind of in a in a flow and a symbiosis with the music?
I have a I have a I can have a sense of how authority and I conduct might use fear.
Yes.
And to control the musicians and how that would be very destructive.
But I'm a bit say a bit more about how a conductor uses love.
Well, they're quite rare.
Because I think it's quite a it's my sense of it is quite hard as a conductor, you know, you put in this position and and the expectation.
I mean, the whole culture is a little bit driven towards authority.
This is your interpretation.
You're going to take control of the orchestra.
They're your instrument to play with.
And, you know, so it can be quite a it's a culture also that feeds the ego that builds up the persona.
It's quite male dominated.
It's quite kind of there's a lot of power plays in that.
But every so often you get lucky and somebody has just transcended all of that and and is there kind of just for the right reasons.
Yeah, from a love for the music from a kind of
something transcendent something spiritual but maybe they're not maybe they wouldn't even say it like that, you know, maybe it's not consciously thought of as being a spiritual thing but it is a spiritual thing for me.
And and just like when there's respect and and generosity and kindness in the rehearsals, you know, in the way of treating each other.
And suddenly you get into this positive dynamic.
A lot of my classical musician friends actually find themselves much happier playing being session musicians.
For you know, for pop artists, because they can often it's not always the case but often they find it's just everyone's much they just treat you much better.
Everyone's kinder.
There's less pressure and classical music can be a very violent, you know, emotionally abusive world kind of going off on a tangent.
Well, I'm curious.
I mean, yeah, I mean, it maybe can bring us back because where I wanted to start was you were obviously a composer before you were a monk.
And for most people, being a composer as a profession.
Well, for some people could be like a dream life that you get paid to create art.
Why would you give that up to become a monk?
So that's my question.
That's a question to you.
Why did you?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And especially did you feel it?
Did you feel with that you were leaving music behind?
Or was that a fear for you?
Yeah, it's so it is a really it's a really good question.
I see it as being fundamentally because of a kind of very deep stubbornness in me.
I didn't really reckon I wouldn't have put it like this at the time but now looking back.
I realized that this I can trace this stubbornness back to when I was a child.
And there was a just a complete refusal in me to participate in certain kinds of music.
So when I felt like it's just for the sake of showing off, you know, technical, you know, facility.
Kind of, you know, musical bravura.
Yeah, totally uninterested.
Just, I don't care.
I just like, no, sorry, it just leaves me completely cold.
When people started talking to me, you know, and this is like a hot house kind of music school where you're supposed to go off and become a soloist and, you know, they start talking about the music industry.
I was probably 13 when I first heard that term.
And I was just like, no, sorry, I don't know.
I don't know what you're talking about, but that has nothing to do with whatever it is that I'm going to do and I have no idea what I'm going to do.
I'm just not going to do that.
So, so this, this just total refusal to participate in this kind of sausage factory thing of, you know, you're going to get technically Britain, you're going to pass all the things, you're going to win the competitions.
You're going to do the stuff and you're going to compete, you're going to be the best.
No, I don't care.
I'm not interested.
That's not what I'm doing.
I don't really know what I am doing, but I just know that it's not that.
And so when I actually got to sort of, you know, university age, I think another aspect of that refusal was actually I turned away from music.
I said, I, I just don't want to do it in the way that it's being offered to me because that, you know, there was a pathway.
It was a probably like chamber music or something like that.
There was definitely a pathway.
But I just, I just didn't like it.
It was too competitive.
It was too mean.
It was too, it just, I didn't feel the love.
I didn't feel the care and what I would now call spirituality.
I wouldn't have called it that then and I wouldn't have known how to characterize what I was looking for, but I just, I knew it's absence.
I didn't know what it was in a positive sense.
I just knew the lack and I wasn't interested.
So then I switched.
I studied mathematics, which maybe seems like an odd choice, but I, I felt like I was trying for me.
I was trying to find out what's at the root of it all.
I know that seems a bit arrogant, but it's kind of like.
There's something important going on, something important and mysterious, and I want to understand it.
And, and I feel like maths has something to do with that.
But, you know, it's very deeply in meshed in the nature of things, type space and consciousness.
So I want to try to understand it, but then I go to Cambridge and find it's dry as dust, completely, you know, no room for creativity.
You know, it's again quite like, yeah, just kind of ended up sticking in my craw.
Like a similar kind of competitive, the hard, kind of egoic driven space.
Yeah.
And again, at some point, just another sausage factory and now for the city, you know, so all of the best mathematicians of my generation ended up being quants and hedge funds.
Literally, you know, many of my friends who are just absolutely incredible mathematicians, instead of being drawn into a love of ideas and research, they end up just being pulled into the city.
And so I felt like, again, something wrong.
So I graduated, I was going to then come back and do the master's thing or whatever, you know, to starting preparing for a PhD.
But again, I had this moment of revulsion, I just don't want to engage, I just don't feel like that's the kind of thing I want to do.
So then went back to music, and I'm more or less just in the summer just sort of started calling my friends and saying, I'm a composer, which, which I plainly wasn't.
Maybe if I just say so, then they'll ask me to write stuff and I'll kind of have to be a composer because then I'll have things to write.
So that's kind of what happened. And I had, you know, it's a lot of wonderful, generous friends.
And, and they played my, you know, my early messes and, and they, you know, I gradually forget stuff. I had some lessons and just did a lot of listening and, and then gradually got to the point where I could, yeah, I could make a living and, and I was having bigger
commissions and, you know, things that getting to write for, you know, really wonderful, wonderful musicians.
And again, I had this moment of just kind of no, I don't, I don't want it, I don't want to do that.
And I'll, I'll use them. I can't.
Yeah, so I actually, I watched a film with my father a while ago, which some of you may have seen it's quite a dark, difficult film.
What's it's what's it called.
It's Cape Blanchette as a conductor.
It's just the name of the conductor.
It's like a three let tar tar. That's it.
And it's, I think it's a very, very scarily accurate portrayal of, of what the culture of celebrity in music can do to somebody when you feed their ego because they are brilliant and they have something and you, you then praise them and praise them and
you reify this personhood, this self to the point where it becomes practically demonic. It's, it's like really toxic.
And then there's abuse and, you know, that people do terrible things and they just behave really badly and, and often are told, you know, everything's condoned, you know, maybe now in the age of me too, it's changing.
But I think for a long time.
I think it's part of our culture almost that the genius is permitted, almost anything in terms of behavior, they're kind of outside the normal expectations of morality.
And it's like as long as the music's good, you can be a monster, doesn't matter, you can treat people badly, but as long as you produce a work of genius.
Ah, then, you know, it's all fine. All is forgiven. You have to be like that. You're a twisted, you know, tortured genius and maybe you have to be that difficult person, that unpleasant person, but it's all worth it because look, you know, a great symphony.
And I just felt like I wasn't anywhere near that level, but I just felt the beginning of that.
And it was around me, and it was in me. I felt like I was being encouraged to compete, first of all.
I was being told that I was writing, I was the one writing the music. And that might seem like, well, of course, you were the one writing the music, but from my point of view as a meditator, it was very clear to me in the present moment experience of putting things, putting notes on the page, that there was no me doing anything.
Right. There was a whole system of clouds, trees, earth, ancestors, something mysterious, and music would come and I'd be like, well, I'll just try to get it down there without messing it up. But I never felt like I wrote this.
No, I'm the one who put my kind of grubby paw prints on it. And I, like, I distorted it. And I hope, like, something survived the process. I didn't write it. You know, that's how I would say things like that to people and they'd look at me like I was an idiot.
They'd be like, or they'd ask me to write, you know, those program blurbs and you'd have to say what your inspiration was for the music. And I would always write things like, oh, I didn't write this, you know.
And then everybody that would get edited out and they say, but what do you mean nobody understands and don't be so, you know, you're just being annoying now. And, you know, it was just so inconvenient because the whole world was set up to praise me for being the one who did this thing.
And then people come up to you after the concert and they say, oh, you wrote this. You. And there's part of you that kind of goes, maybe, maybe I did. Tell me once more. Yeah. Yeah, you know, I said, yeah, yeah, yeah, I did.
You know, and it's part of you likes it. Yeah, tell me once more.
And you were already getting a kind of an allergy. Like you were having some kind of awareness in yourself that no, I don't want to go in this direction. And this is this is quite young and you're kind of like Dharma life, so to speak. Yeah.
So you're still you're already get that awareness.
Well, I was very lucky that I went to Plum Village. The first time when I was 19. So I was at Cambridge, I was still doing the math thing and it kind of got me through Cambridge and I you know, I went to Plum Village at least a couple of times a year and and so by the time I started becoming you know, getting into that I was doing bigger concerts and as a composer I was 20, 25 ish 26 and so by then I was doing longer
concerts in Plum Village. I was meditating quite regularly. And so it was really like an important part of my life, my daily lived experience. And so thanks to that, really, like, really, really, really thanks to that I had the capacity to compare
two kinds of happiness, I suppose. So one was the happiness of being praised, or being acclaimed or being recognized or being, you know, just sort of like, yeah, great people or people you know it was like one particular moment which I think I've talked about before, maybe with you is
the moment of just taking a bow at the end of a concert. So it's a big concert I've been working on this piece for a long time. You know, the audience loved it, it's like standing ovation you go up you take your bow. And it's a thrill for sure it's a rush. But it was very interesting because I just come from Plum Village for this concert. And so the, like, the sensitivity was quite high. So I could taste like, Oh, I'm enjoying this.
But I already want more. I could already feel it's a rush, but it's already not enough. And it's not I know it's not going to last very long, probably about five seconds, you know, kind of want another hit, you know, somebody's going to have to tell me again why it was so great.
And, and at the same time, I could compare with my inner experience of sitting meditation, primarily sitting meditation for me where I knew I could, I could basically have fulfillment.
Well being freedom for nothing for free without needing anything or anyone, not dependent on anything. And it's so different. And I could feel like here is a well being that does me no harm and in fact is just a kind of bomb to my soul.
And here is a kind of thing that is cold happiness, but it's actually just a poison.
It's a drug.
There's an interesting fact in what like, just to step back a little bit, what I hear in your story is from an outside perspective, you know, music seems like a wonderful thing. And the more of it, the more that we have of it, the better for our society.
But, you know, what you describe about the kind of culture of classical music and the, and the, and the culture that's within classical music education, and how toxic something that can be.
And then also you talk about this then this movement towards studying math, which springs from something that's very beautiful that just this natural human desire to understand life to understand reality to get closer.
And then you find something again, then you experience revulsion towards the culture of that. And then you find yourself in this a little bit more free space for your own composer.
But then there's still this, as you described, this kind of toxin of celebrity, of a claim, all that kind of stuff.
But especially the, the, the rarefication of a, of a self, of a, of a, like, this is a person who did this thing.
Yeah.
Because it's not true.
It just makes me what I'm reflecting upon is if we are interested in, in, in how to respond to the child, the various challenges of our times and how we kind of
try to amplify the good parts of our culture, the stuff that's already good, that we have to be aware that even all these attempts can be co-opted, co-opted by all of these other
kind of streams of human collective consciousness towards a claim towards egoism, towards all of this kind of stuff, you know.
I think, yeah, I mean, that's capitalism's major skill set in a sense.
Appropriation, you know, appropriation, decontextualization, commodification, decentralization, it's brilliant.
Does it?
Yeah.
Very effective.
And so can you tell us a little bit about your conscious that there might be many people who've never been to Plum Village, who don't know Plum Village, who doesn't know anything about that.
So could you say a little bit about life at Plum Village and your life at Plum Village and what it's like and what the practice is and what the orientation is and yeah, that kind of thing.
Yeah.
We can dive a little bit more into the music after that.
Sure.
So Plum Village is a monastery, is a Zen Buddhist monastery in the Vietnamese Zen tradition founded by my teacher, Thich Nhat Hanh, when he was exiled from Vietnam.
He was eventually given French nationality and he was able to establish himself there.
And initially it was just set up as more or less like a refugee camp because it was in the middle of the boat, people crisis and France was at that time being quite generous in receiving Vietnamese refugees.
But then they were kind of rootless.
And so my teacher wanted to create a place where they could, you know, where their kids could learn Vietnamese, where they could learn Vietnamese songs and dances and just be connected to their roots and their culture, as well as Buddhism and the practice of Buddhism.
And so, but it was so magnetic that Westerners started arriving and people just sort of started begging my teacher to teach and to ordain them as monastics and eventually sort of relent.
He refused for a long time and then eventually he said, okay, and he started ordaining people as monastics and then he had a kind of, yeah, a vision for, well, maybe, you know, this, this society does actually need monasticism.
Maybe monasticism can, can play a role in healing some of the brokenness, you know, and it's important, I think, to put it in the context of the war in Vietnam, which there is not called the Vietnam war, it's called the American war for obvious reasons.
And so I think my teacher's peace activism was directed at trying to understand what is the root cause of this war, of this violence.
And so when he came to the West and he went to visit the Pope and he went to visit Robert McNamara and Martin Luther King and, you know, many, many other people and, and was trying to understand, you know, the consciousness, why was America engaged in this war, what was the root of this, this violence.
And so all of his peace activism also operates on a very long time scale.
So people were a little bit confused when he founded Plum Village and thought, oh, he's trying no longer doing engaged Buddhism, but no, like this Plum Village, the monastery, founding a monastery in the West is Thai's peace activism, because he's saying,
you need more people like this who are trained not to react in a situation of conflict who are trained not to take sides who can help people to reconcile and get over their anger and their hatred, who can get over the anger and the hatred in their own hearts, who can heal their
own sort of deep rooted ancestral legacies of suffering.
And so it's kind of like aimed at maybe preventing a war, not that war, which maybe he couldn't prevent, but he could maybe stop a war in 50 years time.
And who knows, it's like, maybe seems like not enough, but it's, that's the, that's the direction.
And so we receive people from all over the world, maybe like in Plum Village itself in France, I think it's about 15,000 people a year to who want to usually come into a week of retreat of meditation.
And so it's still a refugee camp, you know, we're receiving the refugees from the meta crisis.
And, and, and just like surrounding them with love and care for a week and looking after them and then we send them out hopefully a little bit more resilient a little bit more loving also able to offer and radiate that love around them very much like what you're doing.
So that's the idea that we, it's like train the trainers.
Kind of model. So we train the carers, the therapists, the teachers, the doctors, the nurses.
And then hopefully that sort of ripples out. And I think it does, it does ripple out.
So that's what Plum Village is about. And in terms of music.
The reason that I could ordain there was that music was always a big part of life in in Plum Village and art in general. So all kinds of art.
So my teacher always said Zen and art always go together. Many, many greats and masters masters have been calligraphers or poets.
And so there was no kind of dislocation, you know, it's not, not a separate thing. It's actually going deeper into the thing that I really want to do, which is music, but in a particular way.
So having said that still wasn't easy because I knew to some extent, even maybe to a great extent, I would have to give it up.
Right. So I'd have to give it up at the professional level that I was accustomed to, like working with the highest, you know, the greatest musicians, young musicians of our era.
And just that very intense high level kind of, I mean, that there was very joyous aspect to that, which I had to renounce.
And so it's kind of like, okay, so now I'm doing music, but it's with an out of tune guitar with, you know, one string miss thing and 100 people who have never been trained to sing and don't know how to read music.
So here we go. So I had to give up a lot of expectations or ideas about what music even is and a lot of my kind of preciousness aspects of music.
But I also, yeah, and also just in the monastic training, there's a kind of like a big part of it is just becoming a beginner again, the cumbling yourself, becoming the one who doesn't know, rather than the one who knows or thinks he knows lots of things.
So maybe right at the beginning, there's a kind of like, it's better actually if I don't play.
I don't want to immediately be seen as somebody who's very capable at something or has a talent because then that makes me, you know, again, I'm still back in this whole ego game.
And I have to kind of just be really, really simple for as long as I can and just, you know, clean wash up sweep do just do everything, all the normal monastery stuff.
And, and hopefully that that that can start to transform some of the bad habits that I was accumulating otherwise.
Yeah, it's interesting.
That point about, I said about Zen and art being, you know, not separate.
It seems like in our, in our culture in the West, you're probably familiar with the book, and conciliants by E. O. Wilson, about the kind of jumping together of knowledge and this kind of this kind of he had this idea just for those of you don't know that there's,
there's going to be a kind of a knitting together or coming together of different streams of knowledge, whereas for most of maybe the last 500 years or so the West has kind of fractionated out the knowledge and specialized specialized specialized specialized.
And it seems that we've done that as well, not just with endeavors and knowledge in the university, but also with culture more generally, you know, so you have religion here, and then you have art here, and then you have
commerce and forms of economic activity here and it's all kind of split up.
And Plum Village was interesting as the art and the spiritual practice are much more woven together as as mutually supportive and affording of each other, which is quite alien to I think in for us in the in the West.
Yes, I mean there has been a kind of secularization of music, obviously, and in a way, importantly, so a separation of music from from a kind of
from dogman. So maybe there was a good thing happening there, but there's also a great loss, which is the professionalization you then go in the direction of the professional professionalization of music and this culture of celebrity and genius and so on.
So there's kind of pluses and minuses I mean like when I say that something is lost what I'm thinking of in particular is the kind of anonymity that was afforded to maybe the monks who wrote the great Gregorian chance.
Nobody, almost nobody knows their names, you know, and didn't matter, but it was just this the purity of that offering to God.
And the lifting up of the spirit in that act of music was so far removed from kind of, you know, personality and
yeah, the cult of celebrity is something very protective because as a monastic you're not dependent on earning an income becoming famous, having a reputation having a following I'm talking now in the modern age.
There's something very privileged actually about what you can do as a monastic, because you don't have to make a living, and you don't have to be famous you don't have to succeed you don't really have to.
You don't have to engage in the whole in the whole capitalist enterprise.
Not say that some you know some monastics do but but you don't have to. And so that's what I'm really fascinated by by this possibility of doing something like music and it's not just music can extend to many different domains but for me, primarily music to be able to come together as a group of people.
To say hey, let's make a piece of music let's even record an album for example, whereas we recently done and we're going to do it, not to make money.
We're not we're not going to get famous we're not going to do it to be popular or to be liked. We're going to do it for love. We're going to do it because we believe that a certain kind of music made in a certain kind of way.
Can help.
It can just help people to feel better.
It can be a very real offering into difficult spaces, you know into into difficult lives.
And it can be a real meaningful support to people.
And when there's that purity of intention.
And for me it's that's very very special now of course you can do that. And I think many great artists do do that they do. They are in service.
But it's much more difficult when you're not a monastic because you do then have to pay the bills and you know you do have to make a living and you do have to get a following and so there's always going to be a pressure sort of pushing you in that direction.
And you have to be very strong actually to sort of retain your real reason why like why you want to do it. What's the point of it all.
And so then for us as monastic as a monastic community now in a sort of more engaged sense what we want to do is to start offering retreats for artists to support them in making
the movement of all kinds for these for maybe this what I would call the deeper reason and which is probably more resonant with their original intention maybe even as a child that that wish to sing to to create to celebrate to paint to dance to write whatever
it's very very pure and I think it needs a lot of protection.
So and in a way with with the monastic life.
There are all these conditions.
You see the support the monastic being able to do creative work artistic work and perhaps as you say a deeper pure way.
And it sounds like what you're describing is is we need to find ways to create conditions for those who are not monastics but still have that same desire to be supported to to be kind of anchored to that deeper pure.
They kind of to use the you know the term that mindfulness sati means remembering to remember that their deeper aspiration rather than yeah it being caught by the again to use Buddhist caught by the marketplace.
Exactly.
And sometimes it's enough just to be reminded or just to be in a community of people who kind of agree that yeah, this is the more important thing.
Yeah.
And it's what I've seen in artists is that there's a kind of a release of a very deeply held tension when they feel safe to make art in that way again they're kind of like, it's a relief.
It's a profound relief to say, oh, wow.
Okay, I can do that.
I'm allowed to do that.
Yes, you are.
You know, it's like the joy of the amateur musician.
Amateur musicians have a huge advantage because they can do it amateur you for love, you know, the meaning of the word.
Yeah.
That's what all music should be.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So Fab that I wanted to I'm conscious of our time and I really wanted to explore a topic with you that we exchange and tweets about I think about a year ago actually looked up in advance of a conversation and it's to do with them.
I think we're in a time where many people care deeply about the world, you know.
And they have deep respect for the various wisdom traditions of the world, Christianity, Buddhism, Hinduism, Judaism, Islam.
And but many people may struggle with the ontological claims, you know, but they still want to be in some way devoted.
And I want I use that that term quite precisely, you know, they saw I think people want to live with the life of devotion.
But it's maybe not not not in it.
It's a devotion to maybe life itself to what to what feels beautiful to what feels meaningful to them.
These are a lot of times these people are described as as spiritual but not religious.
And I'm I want to in one of these this tweet that caught my eye from you because you said something about what we need is this ontological openness.
And it strikes me that Zen is is I think all of the world's wisdom traditions have this kind of quality of them when you get into the mysticism.
Yeah, but Zen seems to be particularly well developed as a kind of almost explicitly being like, yeah, you know, we see when you think you've grasped the final truth.
You know, take that hand yourself a slap and go back and set again, you know.
And so I'm curious like what one if you could say a little bit about what you mean by ontological openness.
And then and if you can then after that maybe you could say a little bit about how you practice a kind of you devoted to a path of practice when there's a deep epistemic humility about what is the nature of life and the nature of existence and the nature of being.
And when you don't really know how do you continue to practice with devotion.
So that's a long question but I good one.
I like it.
It's one that's close to my heart and one that I've struggled with over the years because I went into the monastic life.
Really quite confused in a sense like I knew, like I said before I knew the kinds of things I didn't want.
And I knew that plum village was a place where maybe I wouldn't, you know, I would be free from those aspects of, you know, having to be competitive individualistic and so on.
And maybe I would even be trained to release those habits of company, you know, being competitive and individualistic in myself.
That's still work in progress.
At the same time, I was very confused about what about the role and the status of religion for me.
I was quite, I was and perhaps still am quite anti religious in quite important ways.
This is a bit odd to say as a monastic of 16 years.
But I think that's at the heart of your question. So it was quite, it was quite meaningful for me and also confusing when tie my teacher, you know, as part of becoming a monk in plum village you get a name and your teacher gives you a name, which is sort of the result of their insight into you and into your
being and, you know, you're the particularity of you.
And so I, in the, you know, at the end of the ceremony, I get this name and he says brother fat blend and I don't understand because he's in Vietnamese and then he translates it and he says an English true Dhammic spirituality so Dhamma is the path that's the way that's the teaching and we all it's
we all get all the monks get true Dhammic something or true something of the Dhammas who Dhamma something it's always true and Dhamma and then the last part is, you know, the specific.
So for me it's spirituality, which was a very interesting name to receive. And I received it almost physically I really felt it as as like a.
It was like a, it was like a structure like a three dimensional something like a wave form that just entered into my being and began to heal I could feel it knitting together this deep wound that I didn't even know I had until the moment it started to heal.
I didn't know that I had this gash in my being that I now see as being the corrosive action of scientific materialism basically of a kind of skeptical outlook.
And, and the use the overuse and the overreliance of rationality in a domain where it's not applicable, which is the realm of the mystery of the divine of spirituality so I was trying to assess spiritual truths with rational means, which are completely inappropriate to the task, but I
didn't know that. So I was doing my best to, you know, to skeptically and rationally decide, is there just matter, right, just bits of stuff, meaninglessly bouncing off each other and, you know, kind of like just some giant universal clockwork meaningless pointless soulless indifferent.
And we, and we would be part of that we would also be mechanisms within that view this is sort of, I mean, I'm sure this audience is very familiar with this from in McGillchrist's wonderful work but for me it was really the result of reading.
Richard Dawkins aged 14, kind of, and at the time not being able to argue against it so then taking it on because I just out of sort of an attempt at intellectual rigor and honesty I was like well, I can't.
I don't have the means to disprove it so I have to then apply it to myself and to my life, but that's a very, very painful thing to do age 14 I was telling myself.
I am just a biological machine. I am a mechanism whose sole purpose it doesn't it doesn't even have a purpose it just accidentally is structured in a way that seeks to maximize its chances of of reproduction.
And everything else is is actually just a sort of higher level abstraction of that fundamental thing so kindness altruism generosity love. None of those things are real. They're all fake.
They're fake in me. When I feel kind. I'm not being kind. I'm just trying to seek, you know, sexual status, basically, in some very distantly abstracted way.
That's what I told myself and it's so brutal. It's so painful as a way to live as a thing to believe to believe that that's what we are.
So there I am and I get this name and I suddenly realize like.
Okay, this person that I trust possibly more than myself type is saying a spirituality is something real.
Be you can somehow have something to do with it. You can live it be it manifest it become it maybe you have to learn and live into it but it's there as a potential in you.
And his trust in giving me that name started this deep process of healing for me.
Which is ongoing.
And so I'm trying to come back to your question, which was just help me.
It was to do with ontological openness.
Yes, yes.
Okay, that kind of epistemic humility and still being devoted to a spiritual path right without that kind of conviction or certainty about how things are.
Okay, so this is this is and was still but it was more difficult for me then, but I was sort of coming it's like, okay, I'm going to do this thing I'm going to become a monastic but I'm very very skeptical and kind of not sure about this whole business
whole religion thing and I'm going to become religious a religious person I'm going to am I now Buddhist what you know what does it mean I have to believe certain things and I really had big problems with this.
I had a teacher that I have to be a Buddhist to become a monk.
And in typical Thai style he just grinned.
So, okay, I'm good, I can do this.
And I felt like my trust started to condense around certain things.
Because of we have this this, you know, 14 bodies out for precepts the first of which is is this fundamental kind of what I would call it the lion's roar, which is this commitment to openness, and and a basically and a refusal of ideology or dogma in any form, even
Buddhist ones.
When I read that as like, wow, okay, there is a religion, there is a spiritual practice, which encodes at its heart and puts it in number one, you know, of its principles are refusal to be bound by or committed to any form of dogmatic belief or ideology.
I was like, that is cool.
That's the kind of ground that I can stand on.
Right, if that's the resting place they're kind of like, I refuse to be bound by any doctrine or ideology.
Then that's the kind of ground that I can stand on so it's basically like built in this profound anti dogmatic stance.
I mean, it's also an understanding of the limitations of language, because what it's saying is, we know that whatever we say, in some profound sense is wrong.
Because it's not because it's the map it's not the territory, right language is is a beautiful wonderful thing, but it's not reality it's not experience.
What we have to say about the nature of experience in language is by definition wrong. It's not, you know, it's like this, somebody said, all maps are all models are wrong, some are useful.
Right, so it doesn't mean that we can't use language but we have to be very, very, very careful about what credence we put in it how we handle it.
It's like a knife it can cut you. If you use it skillfully it's helpful. But if you, you know, you, you know, you don't know how to handle it, you're going to get in a big mess.
And that for me is, I don't want to make any two sweeping statement but I for me I think a lot of the harm that has been done by organized religion throughout our various variegated histories and very different cultures.
And around this, the thing that happens when language takes over and solidifies and and then we make demands on people you say no you now have to believe this, and you have to agree with this creed.
You have to, you know, you have to kind of certified like I believe in this. It's the thing that I had the energy to in school, you know, and they say I believe in that and you have to recite the creed and I'd be like, but I don't.
Why do I have to say it this is madness.
And it's, it's not faithful to the roots of Christianity even, you know, it's, it's, it's something's a later accretion, I would say, but maybe I'm not so qualified to talk about that.
But I think what I can have faith in is not a set of beliefs, but a set of practices.
Okay, because the practices are means that are offered to us to help us to disentangle ourselves from our hidden assumptions and views and beliefs.
So they're, they're basically heuristics, they're not treated as holy or absolute truths, right they're treated as temporary, changeable, upgradable work in progress it's like well we found that by paying attention to your breath.
And what happens, which is that you, you start to, you know, the mind can settle, we can move from the verbal sort of narrating experience into a more direct felt sense, you know, experience of life and then we can move into the direct felt sense of the
boiling world of emotions and then we can move into the direct perception of the, you know, at the speed of thought in the present moment without being swept up in those thoughts and then we can kind of observe the process and the arising of, of the subject
of consciousness coming together in every moment, we can observe that directly.
And that all starts by just like paying attention to your breath in your body.
This is a method, it's a praxis.
Right, it's not a, it's not a belief system.
You see what I mean.
Yeah.
But I can have faith in that.
Why, because I can verify it for myself.
Yeah.
I can do it.
And I've done it thousands and thousands and thousands of times.
And it continues to bear fruit.
So that is something I can absolutely have faith in.
And the experience is the verification, the direct knowing.
Only that.
Yep.
And, and what I love is a practice and a community life, like you could call it like John Bovick, he calls it an ecology of practice.
I really like that phrase.
Yeah.
Where you can start to see that every aspect of that community life is articulated is, is, is sort of set up to facilitate that freedom from views, dogmas and beliefs, and that, and that constant reminder to come back and verify for yourself.
I mean, kind of what, you know, what I call the laboratory of your own present moment experience.
You can do lots of experiments and you can test and see, like, is this true?
Yeah.
Does this work?
Is it still true?
Do I need to change it?
Like, yeah, those experiments are very fun and you can get a lot.
And I'm conscious, I'm conscious of our time and I want to hand it over to the audience for questions.
But I just, just, maybe throw one last question at you, Fablin, just to, just to bring us to, to a close.
And also just to let people know why I've wandered into this area of, of, of metaphysics or ontology.
Because one of the things that I'm curious about is, is anti-ontology.
Anti-ontology.
Yeah.
There's this, the.
Unontology.
Yeah.
That's a mouthful.
There seems to be a kind of a need for cultural renewal, you know, and, and affording opportunities
for people to come together.
One of the things that Greg Thomas and I spoke about last time was the African-American musical
heritage and the, the social rituals and practices that the, that, that, that really were life
sustaining for that community for a century, you know.
And listening to the conversation, it was really beautiful.
Yeah.
And, and so, but we're in this time where, where, where we don't have a kind of ontological
consensus in our society, you know.
So, so the reason I'm curious is, is can we, can we create these forms of communitas and
maybe music is one of the most powerful vehicles to do that in a way that is ontologically
open.
In a nontological way.
Yeah.
I love that.
Nontology.
See, I just want to ask you that question.
I'll credit it.
It's a great one.
Do you think we, do you think we can do that?
And, and, and how do you think, how do you think we might be able to do that, you know,
as someone who, who is kind of, has so many experiences of communitas at Plum Village, could
you see that moving into society in a more, without being tethered to an ancient 2000
or 2000 and a half, two and a half thousand year old wisdom tradition?
Okay.
So yes, because we are, that is what we're doing right now in a sense.
I think we're engaged in that business.
And it's happening, I think in lots of ways.
Yes.
Also because I think there are ways to engage with these wisdom traditions that are, that
are safe in a sense from dogma, like I described.
But for me, I feel safe to engage, to be rooted in a tradition because I think tradition,
like we can't dismiss tradition, right?
We can't throw it out of the window.
100%.
Yeah.
We actually, I think right now part of the danger is kind of spiritual window shopping
or another manifestation of that is just the capitalist appropriation of even something
like mindfulness and some, you know, the sort of the most beautiful, sacred, you know,
products of human culture are now getting commodified, productified and sold back to
us in almost unrecognizable form where they are completely separated from the ethical
roots, completely separate.
And so we're in a very sticky situation.
So what I propose is this kind of this narrow path where we can, we can receive the insights
of tradition as, as praxis, not as dogma or, you know, kind of a belief system.
So what you have is a sort of like an unbelief system or a kind of like belief verification
system or like what I would say that my, I've been thinking about this a lot recently and
this is to do with the book that I'm working on, which is so it's a one possible framing
of Buddhism for me because people have said, oh, maybe Buddhism is like science or is, you
know, science, no, no, I think if anything, Buddhism is a set of skills or methods which
involve also training at a teacher-student relationship, right?
So it's not just you'd learn it in a book or from a YouTube video that there is something
mysterious that arises in community practice.
There is something mysterious and deep that is beyond words that is transmitted by a teacher
to their disciple, right?
And so this is also a little bit antithetical to our Western sensibilities of I'm just going
to do my own and don't tell me and, you know, I'm kind of like, we're a little bit skeptical
about teacher-student relationships because of the way that they've been abused and how,
you know, power dynamics have come into them.
So there's, you know, it's not easy to navigate, but I do think it's possible to receive these
traditions, to learn from them as a way to take off the glasses that we're wearing without
knowing which are our views, our world views, right?
It's like we are, we have a view on the nature of reality, on the nature of our self, on the
nature of human beings and what it all means.
And then we get to have a practice that goes, oh, look, look at that, that's interesting.
Here's a view.
And then you can either, you know, you can give them, you can clean the glasses, you can put the
back on, or you can put on a different pair of glasses, you can change them, you can wear
sunglasses, you know, it's like, or you can wear no glasses.
Very hard, but possible.
I have a point of disagreement within McGorchrist on this one.
So, yeah, I think in that sense it's possible to engage with tradition.
As to your question about whether it's possible to create spaces of, I don't know exactly how you
put it, but it's kind of like spaces of healing.
Munitas, I would say.
Yeah, and maybe music and celebration without feeling that you have to now become a member
of something or, you know, have a certain allegiance to any particular tradition.
I would say in Plum Village, the vast majority of people who come to our retreats don't
consider themselves Buddhist.
They're never asked to convert to anything.
They're never told that they have to now be Buddhist.
In fact, what we generally do is encourage people to go to strengthen their roots in whatever tradition
they come from, whether that's Christian, Muslim, Judaism, whatever it might be.
We're like, there's beauty and depth in your roots, and you also have to take care of them.
And if these practices can support you in that process, in freeing up and healing your own
relationship with your own tradition, then that's our greatest happiness.
So we're never, like, we're not interested in converting people.
And I think we can create these spaces where practices are offered, and they're offered freely.
Like, it's not kind of like, you now have to do this.
It's like, well, if you've chosen to come to Plum Village, then presumably there's an intention to experiment with this.
So there has to be a general willingness to have a go.
But it's not very forceful or authoritarian, as it were.
It's just like, try it.
If you like it, carry on and apply it.
Be inventive, be creative.
Wonderful.
Okay.
Well, I think this is a good time to open to some questions from everyone.
What I'm going to do is, but then I'm going to remove the spotlights that are on us.
And then hopefully we'll see everyone.
Yeah.
And then if you'd like to ask a question, if you could just raise your hand, if you can do that electronically, that would be, that would be best.
So you can go to the reaction function.
They're in the bottom of the toolbar and then click raise hand.
And then, yeah, you should be able to ask a question.
See, there's lots of wonderful comments here that haven't had a chance to read.
What was the point of disagreement within McGillchrist?
Well, it's not really a disagreement.
I think he, he said something slightly offhand about not believing that it's possible to have no view.
So what the highest view, what's considered right view in sort of traditional Buddhist thinking is sometimes referred to as the absence of views.
And I think he may have taken that a little bit, not in the sense that it's intended to say, well, it's not possible to not have a view.
You always have a view because you're embodied and, you know, so as a human being, yes, you are seeing from somewhere.
But what I think, as I understand it, it's, it's meant to mean the freedom from a set of metaphysical prejudices, basically, of any kind.
And that's at the conscious level, but also at a very deep unconscious level.
So it's basically also a freedom from language and a freedom of the kind of narration from the narration of experience through the means of language because language in itself encodes certain views about the nature of reality just because of the ways the structures of grammar,
for example, the word the verb to be implies that things either are or they are not.
Right, but that's, that's a view about the nature of reality, which from a Buddhist point of view is is very misleading.
And it's actually the root of a lot of suffering.
Like if we think that things exist, then we reify them, we solidify them.
So, so the freeing from views is this idea of like, if we could somehow get to the roots of how these ideas, how language has conditioned perception, we can, we can uproot that and get back to a kind of direct perception,
in which there is no reification, and we're free.
And that's what's considered the view of no views of no view but it doesn't mean that you don't you still see the mountain right you still see the river but you just don't reify it in the same way.
So I think if we had a chance to talk about it more I don't think we disagree at all.
There's enlightenment direct perception from the right hemisphere.
Maybe.
I don't know.
We don't talk about it much for obvious reasons.
Why don't we talk about it.
Because then we make mistakes.
Because language.
It's great to ask a question. We, and it's great to have questions coming in the chat but it's also really nice to get people's voices in the space.
So, Jonathan, I think Jonathan has a question.
It was a great question in the, in the.
Hi there, can you hear me okay.
Yes.
Thank you.
So thanks for the wonderful, really wonderful event and talk and thanks for joining us and being here today. I, I guess I wanted to just query you on the spirit, rather than the letter of what you said vis a vis the your own history and your own sense that you could
commit to something that was a kind of.
Nontology, as the term was coined.
And I guess I was just curious about how that works when one faces resistance, or one faces struggle because I think those who studied spiritual practice and alternative spiritualities outside of religious context, often find the problem arises when precisely when you reach
some kind of limit or obstacle.
And you find that you're obliged to actually, you know, seek out a teacher or seek out someone who's been there before. And that's precisely what you get within a tradition.
And the binding quality of that tradition is often something more.
If not doctrine then Dharma, you know, at least there's some kind of shared commitment to something that isn't just a practice.
And I wondered how you contend with the idea that, you know, try it, you might like it or try it might work.
How, how, how far that can take you and whether it risks collapsing into a and do what works for you and you only, and therefore ends up shoring up problems of narcissism and, and kind of spiritual materialism, rather than actually leading to something like transformation.
This is a great question and it's, thank you.
It's one that's also close to my heart, because now, you know, as a slightly more senior monastic, I'm involved in monastic training. So I have to, you know, we receive young men in their 20s, who have probably done quite a lot of spiritual window shopping, and who very much want to come and
sort of try it but without committing much to anything.
And it's a huge problem, because so the subtlety for me is this, that when I say, you know, for example, I received this, that there's a sutra called the Anapanasati Sutra, 16 exercises of the full awareness of breathing.
So there's this thing that the Buddha said, maybe the Buddha said, but anyways recorded as the Buddha said this, which involves 16 exercises.
They're very specific, they're very detailed.
And the invitation is to try it. Right. So obviously,
there's, then there's the question of the way, the how, which is a kind of hemisphere question as well, because I could try it in a kind of like a very uncommitted way.
I could try it in a way that has no love in it.
I could try it in a, in a sort of selfish, narcissistic way. It's not going to work.
Right. So the try I'm talking about involves a kind of surrender already. There has to be some stance of spirituality, which often depends on the relationship with the teacher.
So there has to be a relationship of trust. It can also be with a community where you see like, I accept that I don't know, and that I may not be the best judge, actually, of what is reliable and what is unreliable.
Even to some extent in my own experience, because I may be so caught up in narcissistic fallacies that I don't even know what's happening in myself.
So I need to trust that there are kind people around me who have enough insight and presence that they can kind of maybe at the beginning see into me a little more clearly than I can see into myself.
And they will help me and they will guide me.
And when they ask me to do something when they invite me to do something like say, bring my attention to my breath.
I have to be very, very attentive to the, not only the explicit instruction, but the implicit instruction, the way.
So when they say it, there's obviously the sort of syntactic content of what they're saying, but there's also the tone of speech.
There's the cadence of speech, there's their energy, whatever you want, you know, whatever that means, their being, their vibration, somehow they're also communicating to me a way of being with my breath, which can't be written down.
And I have to be, I have to surrender a lot of my hostility, you know, a lot of my reactivity, a lot of my arrogance, just to start to open up to the possibility of I really don't know and I'm ready to be taught.
That's the stance, it's like, I am trainable.
I'm sufficiently open that I know I've kind of developed a little bit of a version, you know, not a version, but it's kind of skepticism about the reliability of my own assessment of things.
So I then take refuge in a teacher or in a community who has more experience on the path and may then and that depth of experience transcends lifetimes because it's that teachers, teachers, teachers, teachers and they're going back.
So it's a very, very deep kind of experience that I'm talking about, which is then the sort of what is being transmitted.
And then when I sit down on my cushion and I try to follow my breath, I may conclude after one session, oh, well, this doesn't really work, or this is not applicable to me, or my personal trauma is different.
I need more of this, a little bit of that.
And this is, you know, we get this reaction and all the time you say, well, I know that's great, but you know, I need something more specific, you know, I want to do my own thing.
And we have to be quite firm.
And what we say is, okay, so you say you tried.
But I don't actually believe you.
You need to try again.
And, and again, and again, and there's the discipline element, you need to do it enough.
And you need to do it kind of like, honestly enough, and with with enough of the right attitude, the sort of spiritual surrender to say, Yeah, I have wholeheartedly engaged with this practice with a little bit of faith.
I have a little bit of faith thrown in, right, because for me to sit there on the cushion and say, Okay, so all I'm going to do is bring my attention to my in breath and to my out breath and every time my mind wanders, I'm going to bring my attention back.
And I, and it's supposed to do something.
But fundamentally, I don't know why I don't know how I don't know the mechanism I can't understand the mechanism of why that would do anything I can you know have some theories but they're basically useless.
And, and if it doesn't work.
It's probably because I didn't do it right. So it's kind of like my, I have to, you know, I have to suspend my disbelief in my own inability to do in my own ability to do it and more like, Well, if the Buddha said it works, and all of his disciples say it worked and my teachers as it works.
It probably does work.
And I kind of have to step into the void, I have to take a leap of faith at some level I have to actually, because it's part of the working of it, and it does work is when I believe that it's going to work.
And it's a bit weird, and it can sound a little bit, you know, and then you're, you know, getting into some sticky territory for us, very rational Westerners who have grown up on skepticism.
So it is hard, you know, but then faith is a necessary component and discipline and rigor, and can it sort of community checks and balances and spiritual narcissism is an absolute reality that we constantly have to be alert to.
Thank you.
I realized I muted there. Thanks for the question, Jonathan. Thanks for your response.
I think we're just coming to a time but I see that Kelly's raised her hand so if we can keep it short Kelly I think it'd be great if we could just get one more.
Go for it.
Thanks so much for this inspiring conversation today.
I'm a professional musician and I am in the on the threshold of a transition where I'm feeling called to do music as an active service.
And I'm wondering if you have like an idea or something to be taken into consideration, as I'm working with and collaborating with other artists to define what that can look like like in the pedestrian sense like how do you know how do we set up the setting to create the conditions for the
mindset to have this transcendent communal.
Excellent.
Excellent question. Thank you. A very practical one too.
I have some I would say some direct experience of this in a couple of different settings so I try to be brief.
So, as part of my monastic life in very early on, because I was a musician everybody assumed that I could sing. This was not the case.
If you know anything about classical the world of classical music if you're if you're instrumentalists like singers are kind of, I don't know, there's somewhere over there but you don't mainly don't talk to them, and they don't talk to you.
And you certainly don't sing, which is a stupid and awful thing because it's like, as a musician.
I don't know, I think we should all be encouraged to sing. Anyway, that's another point.
Everybody assumed that I could sing so they would, you know, at the beginning of the sitting meditation and be like, oh, if I play and go and chant and do you know do the we have a morning chant before the sitting meditation in the morning and the evening.
And of course, I can hit the right notes I can read the music you know I can do that but I never I don't feel comfortable singing. And in fact I feel a lot of shame and confusion.
Are we connected. Yeah, I think we're back. I think we're back.
We lost you just when you were talking about feeling shame. Yeah, in the morning.
Right, so I would then I started noticing because then okay so apply mindfulness notice what's happening. Okay, I am treating this as a performance.
I'm treating this as basically me being the best. I have to chant it better than anybody else have to do it really well.
And, and I'm sort of expecting some praise afterwards I'm kind of like or at least I'm, you know, I'm kind of waiting for it like somebody's oh that was that was a really good morning chant.
Okay, I want to know how that's that's just unconsciously how I'm treating it also I've now noticed that well.
Okay, so this whole thing is making me quite tense and it's the whole thing is quite unpleasant so let me just reframe this whole experience.
What's happening here is I have a room of 150 people.
They could not care less about me right now and my child.
They're just waking up it's like 630 and six in the morning.
They're just trying to have a nice sitting meditation.
They're just hoping not to fall asleep.
You know, maybe hoping to have a little insight or to feel comfortable or to feel well.
So I am in service to that or I could be.
Let me put myself I, I'm not important.
What's important here is all of these people.
What do they want. What do they need. How can I support them I am here as their servant really like to just.
So then my love comes up.
You see, then I'm like, it's like my mother seed.
I just like, I just want to love them.
I'm like, oh, wow, yeah, it's tough.
You know, maybe you're not used to sitting meditation.
Maybe you get distracted.
Maybe you fall asleep like my wish for you is to have the most wonderful, peaceful, insightful sitting meditation you've ever had in your life.
That's now all I'm thinking about for these 150 people.
I'm just, it's like a prayer.
So it's really like, talk about setting an intention, but it's literally like I would join my palms and be sitting there in the dark at the sitting at the bell.
It's not a performance. Nobody can see me.
I'm just like creating this intention.
What I wish is for you, all of you to have a wonderful, peaceful sitting meditation.
And I only think about that.
And then I start inviting the bell and I start chanting and it all comes naturally and it's all very fluid.
I'm not worried about it because I maintain my concentration throughout the whole chart on these people's experience, not mine.
And I found every single time I managed to remember that to reframe what's even happening, who it's about, what it's for.
Everything works better.
And recently we had a chance to work with a wonderful producer in Plum Village and we didn't really know what was going to happen.
But part of the idea was that maybe we're going to record an album.
But right at the beginning, some of us got together and because I had this experience, I was really keen and it turned out everybody was.
Everybody was quite aligned on this to set an intention.
So we kind of invented a little ceremony.
And, you know, we have some ceremonies in Plum Village and I kind of looked at one in the chanting book and there was one about like blessing a space.
Where there's a purification of the water ceremony and then you sort of spread water around the room and you and you call on the support of the ancestors and there's a whole thing there's a chance and it's.
So I just thought, well, we are blessing a space we're blessing this recording studio.
And we're blessing each other and we're we're all going to and I created within the context of that little ceremony opportunity for everybody to share their intention, like what was important for them in this project.
And we, and it was very beautiful what everybody said, like, you know, I think some of the things I've said today are a little bit related it's more like for me it was the importance of being able to record and make and create right and sing
and perform music for love and to to to kind of touch an experience of love and maybe even healing in others and just to feel like okay we're sending it out into the world only for that.
And then the others shared different things but all quite, you know, very aligned actually.
And I must say that for the next three weeks of this project, I felt we were protected by this vow by this intention it's it's really it's a ceremony, which is again doesn't come easily for me.
It was very, very profound it really really and I felt like about halfway through some of us noticed he was starting to lose it and there was a little bit of tension coming into the group a little bit of disgruntlement and competition and weird energies.
So we're like, Oh, okay, we need to, you know, bring every because we brought now we started before and now there was like 12 people so it was like, Oh, they didn't all do the ceremony we should do another ceremony.
So we just did another ceremony and everyone was like, Oh, yeah, that's what this is about. That's what we're doing. And it provides this kind of protection.
Just knowing that we are actually aligned at this very, very deep level. We know what we care about we know what's important to us.
Yeah, so that's, I mean,
I think that's real. I think that's a very, very real thing and it maybe it's just like a stick of incense and then everybody shares an intention.
Maybe there's the song that you can sing together, maybe you can have a bell, you know, it's like you have to kind of just conjure it up, but there's probably bits and pieces of things, you know, other traditions and things that you can pull from to make it work.
So if you want, you know, there's a privilege.
We have a chanting book is called chanting from the heart, and there's a ceremony in there it's like dedication of the
of a new house or something. So that's the that's the structure we followed but I would recommend that you do something that's meaningful and sort of rooted for for you.
If that then thank you for the question Kelly.